
How to Claim and Access Your Virtual Machine
============================================

What is a Virtual Machine?
--------------------------

A virtual machine (VM) is essentially a file together with a client
program that interprets that file. The file's contents include:

-  An operating system
-  Virtual devices
-  A file system
-  Some set of application programs

From the user's point of view, logging on to a VM looks very much the
same as logging on to a remote server - with some important differences:

-  The user/owner has total control of the machine and has root access.
   This makes it easy to install software and customize the environment.
-  The 'machine image' may be exported to other platforms that support
   VMs (such as Amazon Web Services). From the perspective of a
   developer, this means that entire 'appliances' or specialized VMs can
   be exported whole, with all the software and virtual devices
   necessary to perform a particular task. From the perspective of a
   user, this means that all the tools necessary to complete a task may
   be easily accessed without having to install special packages and
   such (because this is done upfront by the developer). The VM for this
   course will be made available as an Amazon Web Services image and as
   an image that can be run by other VM clients.

How to Claim a Virtual Machine
------------------------------

We will be using VMs provided by Duke's Office of Information Technology
(OIT). Each student must first claim a VM. Go to the VM Manage website:

https://vm-manage.oit.duke.edu/

Click the 'New' option at the top of the page. You will be prompted to
enter some identification information and your Duke NetID and password.
Next, you will be asked to name and describe your project. Use whatever
is meaningful to you. Finally, when you are asked to choose a server,
choose:

NGS Summer Workshop

Accept the terms of use and click 'Request VM'. Now you should see some
information pertinent to your VM. Most importantly, you need to record
your URL and password. The URL will be of the form:

colab-sbx-XXX.oit.duke.edu

The XXX part is unique. You will see an initial password that you can
cut and paste to login. If you know how to change a Unix password and
wish to change it - go ahead, but it is fine to leave the default one.
Just don't enter any banking information or credit card numbers. :)

How to Access the VM
--------------------

Ipython Notebook
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

We will mostly be accessing the VMs using the Ipython Notebook. This
lecture is written using said tool, and it is really, really useful! In
this interactive environment, you can access the linux command line,
write 'markdown' type text, use latex, run code, create files (scripts -
more about that later) and run graphics. We will probably not get to use
the full capability in this workshop, but you can learn more here:

http://ipython.org/notebook.html

We are going to setup the VM as a 'notebook server'. This is essentially
a web server that allows connections to the notebook via your browser.

Before we can actually use the notebook properly we need to configure a
password for it. That means we will dive right in to ssh.

ssh
~~~

You can access your VM using the command line (a non-graphical,
text-based interface). Many non Computer Science types find the command
line scary and confusing. Don't worry - you can't break anything (at
least nothing that cannot be fixed). The first thing you need to do is
get a terminal client. If you are using a Mac - Good News! There is one
built right in. Find the little screen (terminal) icon and click on it.

For Windows users: if you do not already have an ssh client, you will
need to download and install one. Do this now:

http://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/download.html

Ok. Now that everyone has a way to ssh, do so using

ssh bitnami@colab-sbx-XXX.oit.duke.edu

(or the equivalent in putty)

Now, you should have a nice command line (shell) prompt:

bitnami@ubuntu14-generic-template-01:~$

(For short, I will just use the '$' when representing the prompt)

.. raw:: html

   <H3>

Creating a Notebook Password

We are going to access our VMs via an

First thing we are going to do is to create a hashed password. This is a
password that is encrypted using a 'one-way' algorithm. The hashed
password has fixed length and cannot be reverted to the actual password.
There are lots of programs that do this, but as we have it installed,
we'll use ipython.

$ ipython

In [1]: from IPython.lib import passwd

In [2]: passwd()

Enter password:

Verify password:

Out[2]: 'sha1:67c9e60bb8b6:9ffede0825894254b2e042ea597d771089e11aed'

In[3]: quit

The text following Out[2]: is your hashed password. Copy this into the
buffer by selecting and either using Cmd-C (Mac) or the putty menu.
Include the single quotes.

Now, we are going to use a strange editor called 'nano'.

Type:

$

And then change the line:

c.NotebookApp.password =
u'sha1:51314c1d824e:c401b21da2e4bf6eb2c68a30d688b16858461f4b'

to use the password you created.

Type Ctrl-X to exit and ``<``\ enter\ ``>`` to save.

.. raw:: html

   <H3>

Starting the Server

There is a shell script (just a file with commands) in your VM's home
directory (user=bitnami) called 'startnb'. Run this in the background:

$ ./startnb &

Now, your notebook server should be up and running. To access it, open a
browser window and point it to the URL:

https://colab-sbx-XXX.oit.duke.edu:9999

(XXX is your VM's number).

You will need to enter your password. This is the password you created
and placed in your notebook server configuration file.

.. raw:: html

   <H3>

Time to Play!

Once you have entered your password, you will see a directory listing.
Let's open the next lecture notebook!

Click on the directory 'ngs-computing-bootcamp' and the click on the
file 'BasicRinJupyterAndRstudio'

